

Distance Protection Zone 3 Misoperation During System Wide 
Cascading Events: The Problem and a Survey of Solutions

A.M. Abdullahcor1

ahmad.abdullah@cu.edu.eg

K. Butler-Purry

klbutler@tamu.edu

Corresponding author

Department of Electrical Power and Machines, Cairo University, 
Gizah, Egypt, 12613

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas A&M 
University, College Station, TX, 77843

Abstract

Distance relay zone 3 misoperation has been responsible for major 
blackouts around the world. Zone 3 misoperation generally occurs 
under system wide cascading events such as the 2003 Northeastern 
US-Canada blackout or under stressed system conditions such as 
the 2015 Turkish blackout. This paper explains the problem of 
zone 3 distance protection misoperation. The paper then proceeds 
to survey the literature for possible solutions to increase 
distance relay security to prevent distance protection 
misoperation. Three categories of solutions were proposed in 
literature to address the problem of zone 3 distance protection 
misoperation. The first one is anticipation and prevention of 
misoperation in the planning stage. The second one is 
communication assisted protection schemes that use remote 
measurements to enhance relay security. The last one uses local 
data to enhance distance relay security. 

Distance protection zone 3  blackouts  cascading events  
misoperation  security 



1 Introduction<sec:Introduction>

With the deregulated market structure in the United States and 
Europe, grid operators are under more pressure to reap more 
profits of existing infrastructure due to increased competition. 
The grid is thus increasingly operated near the threshold of 
stability. Failure of the grid, better known as blackouts, 
carries catastrophic economic and societal sequences. Large 
blackouts tend to be due to either extreme natural events such as 
hurricanes or a series of events called cascading failures (Hines et al., 2009)
. In this paper, we only focus on cascading events. Those events 
can be any of the following: line tripping, overloading of other 
lines, malfunctions of protection systems, power oscillations and 
voltage instability (Yamashita et al., 2009). The reason that is 
considered in this paper is distance protection misoperation 
which is a contributing factor in seventy percent of all 
cascading events (Chen et al., 2005). If not discovered and 
mitigated in an early stage, cascading events generally lead to a 
complete blackout. With today’s society much dependence on 
electricity as a form of energy, preventing such damage is of 
high importance. 

Cascading failures are defined as “a sequence of dependent 
failures of individual components that successively weaken the 
power system” (Baldick et al., 2008). Since the 2003 US-Canada 
blackout, cascading events have drawn much attention in the 
industrial and academic community. Even though the world has 
witnessed many blackouts prior to the 2003 blackout (Hines et al., 2009)
, the dramatic causes and consequences of the 2003 blackout have 
left industrial and academic community with the burden of 
exploring this phenomenon in more detail. To understand the 
severity of the 2003 blackout (Liscouski et al., 2004), it 
sufficient to say it had caused the loss of 62 GW which caused 
the lights to turn off for more than 51 million people in the 
eastern interconnection. Considering the many components and the 
bits and pieces involved, a domino effect of events evolved 
slowly (hours) or fast (seconds) according to the region causing 
a degradation of the integrity of the system leading ultimately 
to a complete blackout. The main reason of the 2003 blackout was 
distance relay misoperation. Daunting efforts had to be exerted 
to gain more knowledge and understanding of the underlying 
phenomenon. 

Relays by design act quickly to remove the fault from the system 
by disconnecting faulted lines. However, sometimes relays fail to 
perform such function which is considered a protection system 
misoperation. Of all protection system misoperations that lead to 
cascading events, this paper focuses exclusively on distance 
protection misoperation. A protection system misoperation is 
defined as “a failure to operate as intended for protection 
purposes” (NERC, 2014). Various categories are given for 
misoperation in (NERC, 2014). However, in this paper the word 
misoperation will be used exclusively to mean only one of them, 
namely, an operation in which a protection system trips a healthy 
line due to heavy loading when no fault exists. In other words, 
other causes of distance protection misoperation such as power 
swing are not considered in this paper. Notable cascading events (Yamashita et al., 2009; Novosel et al., 2004)
 begin with lines that were tripped due to actual faults. The 
tripping of those faulty line causes the current flowing in those 
lines to be redistributed to adjacent lines. Those lines may be 
overloaded and thus tripped incorrectly -protection misoperation- 
which may trigger a sequence of cascading events that might 
ultimately lead to a blackout. It should be noted that regardless 
of the initial triggering events- whether a fault or not- that 
cause cascading events, historically those cascading events were 
triggered under stressful system conditions (Liscouski et al., 2004; Kosterev et al., 1999)
.

As mentioned in (Yamashita et al., 2009), one of the effective 
ways to prevent cascading events is to specify potential 
undesirable relay operations ahead of time. In this paper, we 
show that even though distance protection misoperation can be 
anticipated ahead of time, prevention of this misoperation is not 
possible with distance protection principle only because the 
distance protection principle is not able to be selective in some 
regions of its operation. 

The paper is organized as follows: Section [sec:Typical-Distance-Protection]
 provides a sample distance relay that is set according to NERC 
standards. Once this relay is set according to NERC directives, 
it will be explained in the same section that the relay may still 
misoperate under various operating conditions. Anticipation and 
detection of distance relay misoperation in the planning stage is 
described [sec:Detection-and-mitigation-of-cascading-events-in-the-planning-stage]
. [sec:Communication-Assisted-Schemes] provides an overview of 
the communication assisted schemes that have been proposed to 
eliminate the distance protection misoperation. Lastly, [sec:Modifications-to-Local]
 offers a survey on the methods that were suggested in literature 
to enhance the distance protection security using local data 
only. 

2 The Distance Protection Misoperation Problem<sec:Typical-Distance-Protection>

On August 14th of 2003 (Liscouski et al., 2004), the US eastern 
interconnection suffered one of the largest blackouts in the 
recent US history. Three 345 kV transmission lines sagged into 
untrimmed trees during the hot summer days. The tripping of those 
lines caused another 345 kV transmission line to carry 
substantial system load. The heavy loading of this last line 
coupled with relatively low system voltage, caused the distance 
relay to confuse a heavy loading situation for uncleared zone 3 
fault as the impedance entered the third zone of protection which 
in turn resulted in tripping of the heavily loaded line. The 
tripping of the healthy yet heavily loaded line worsened system 
conditions leading to a chain of events that ultimately led to 
system collapse. Also, on March 31st of 2015 (Entoso-E, 2015), 
the Turkish grid suffered the worst blackout ever recorded since 
1999 when an earthquake caused a complete shutdown of the grid. 
On the contrary to the 1999 earthquake, the 2015 blackout was 
caused by a impedance protection misoperation that tripped a 
heavily loaded line on the 400 kV transmission level even though 
there was no fault on the tripped line or anywhere in the 
transmission network. As can be seen from the examples in (Liscouski et al., 2004; Entoso-E, 2015)
 in which distance protection misoperation have been the main 
cause of the blackouts or in (Abdullah et al., 2012) in which 
distance protection misoperation have been studied in the IEEE 
118 bus system , a distance protection misoperation is 
characterized by a distance protection system seeing a heavy load 
on a line as a fault. This confusion arises from the fact that 
the impedance measured by the impedance protection system 
coincides with that of a fault. The reason for the heavy load can 
be due to load shifting after a fault as in the 2003 US-Canada 
blackout (Liscouski et al., 2004) or due to lines out of service 
for maintenance causing one line to carry substantial system 
power transfer as in the 2015 Turkish blackout (Entoso-E, 2015) 
or due to any unforeseen reasons. 

To illustrate that this confusion is not tied up with certain 
system conditions but rather inherent insecurity in the distance 
protection principle, the single line diagram shown in Figure [fig:System-Configuration-for-formulating-problem]
 is used to formulate the problem in general terms. It will be 
shown below that this insecurity always exists and the degraded 
system conditions only excite it; that is, for some regions in 
the impedance protection zone the protection system is not able 
to be selective between a fault and non-fault condition. Without 
the degraded system conditions, it is highly unlikely that a 
distance protection misoperates. Even though, degraded system 
conditions can be anticipated in the planning stage, the system 
operator will have nothing in hand to prevent a distance 
protection misoperation if local function of the distance 
protection is used alone. It is important to keep in mind that 
distance protection systems are set locally with the help of the 
impedance of adjacent lines without any information about the 
system load until the coordination study phase. In the 
coordination study phase, the transmission line owner checks all 
settings against applicable standards. This is explained in 
detail in (Thompson et al., 2015). In the following paragraphs, 
we will set up the relay settings first then discuss what happens 
in system wide cascading events.

In Figure [fig:System-Configuration-for-formulating-problem], the 
distance protection relay that will be studied is the relay at 
point A of line A-C. Line A-C is connected to three (3) lines, 
namely C-M, C-N and C-P. The number of lines connected to line 
A-C will not affect zone 1 or zone 2 settings but will affect 
zone 3 settings. As will be seen below, tripping in Zone 3 
becomes more insecure with more lines connected to line A-C as 
zone 3 reach becomes larger. To simplify the analysis, all lines 
are assumed to have the same impedance as well as the short 
circuit level. However, as will be explained below, this 
simplification does not affect the generality of the problem 
formulation. The impedance and the rating of the lines are 60 \varOmega
 and 3000 Amp, respectively and are taken from (Protection et al., 2005a)
. The setting of zone 1 is assumed to be 0.85 of the line 
impedance. Zone 2 setting is assumed to be 1.2 of the line 
impedance. However, some consideration is needed to set the third 
zone. The third zone has to be set such that it can protect the 
longest adjacent line (assumed to be line C-P in this case) and 
to protect 20% beyond that line to provide backup to the remote 
circuit breakers. In case of a bolted three phase fault on line 
C-P and assuming that the short circuit contributions of all 
buses is given in Figure [fig:System-Configuration-for-formulating-problem]
 by I_{index} where index is the bus name (being M , N, A or P), 
the voltage at distance protection system at A can be written as 
given in equation [eq:VoltageAtRelat].[float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig1.tif>

[Figure 1: 
System Configuration for formulating the problem<fig:System-Configuration-for-formulating-problem>

]
]

V_{A}=I_{A}\times Z_{A}+Z_{P}\times\left(I_{M}+I_{A}+I_{N}\right)

The impedance that is seen by the relay A can then be written as 
in [eq:ApparentImpedanceAtRelay]

Z_{R}=\frac{V_{A}}{I_{A}}=Z_{A}+Z_{P}\left(1+\frac{I_{M}+I_{N}}{I_{A}}\right)

Equation [eq:ApparentImpedanceAtRelay] will only be applicable to 
faults on line C-P, if we need to include 20% for the line that 
is beyond bus P, then the impedance Z_{P} in [eq:ApparentImpedanceAtRelay]
 has be replaced by 1.2\times Z_{P}. Using the data in (Protection et al., 2005a)
 and assuming all lines are identical as well as their short 
circuit contribution, then the setting of zone 3 will be Z_{A}+3.6\times Z_{P}=4.6\times Z_{A}
. The three zones are plotted in Figure [fig:Distance-Relay-characteristic]
. [float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig2.tif>
[Figure 2: 
Distance protection characteristic for system in Figure [fig:System-Configuration-for-formulating-problem]
 <fig:Distance-Relay-characteristic>
]
] 

After setting up the relay locally, applicable standards and 
directives need to be applied to the settings for compliance 
purposes. This step involves running worst case power flow in the 
summer peak case. The most notable directive is the load 
encroachment. The load encroachment zone is an area of the 
protection zone in which the load impedance “ encroaches” 
–intrudes- upon the fault impedance. Load encroachment will 
obviously cause misoperation and should be removed from the zone 
of protection (Protection et al., 2005a). To plot the load 
encroachment zone according to NERC directives (NERC, 2014; Protection et al., 2005a; Protection et al., 2005b)
, the load zone should include the point which corresponds to 
150% line loading and 0.85 per unit voltage. Thus the load 
encroachment locus of the distance relay at A will consist of two 
parts. The first part will be an arc of circle of radius given in 
equation [eq:LoadImpedance] which is given as arc RIT in Figure [fig:System-Configuration-for-formulating-problem]
. This arc RIT corresponds to the least impedance that the relay 
should not issue a trip command for. The other characteristic 
load lines will be two lines making an angle of \pm30^{\circ} 
with the x-axis (\pm30^{\circ} represents the power factor of the 
line under worst case loading condition)

Z_{load}=\frac{V_{A}}{I_{A}}=\frac{\frac{345kV}{\sqrt{3}}\times0.85}{1.5\times3000}=57\varOmega

The orange hashed area RLQT is the load encroachment area. NERC 
directives (NERC, 2014; Protection et al., 2005a; Protection et al., 2005b)
 states that this load encroachment zone has to be removed from 
the relay operating zone. It can be seen at once that if the 
impedance seen by the relay lies within the solid green area URI 
then a relay may confuse this operating point for a fault since 
the point lies already in zone 3. This confusion arises if the 
fault resistance is high enough to cause the fault point to lie 
within the solid green area URI. In Figure [fig:Distance-Relay-characteristic]
, this fault resistance ranges from 30\varOmega to 90\varOmega. 
The fault resistance can be obtained by measuring the distance 
between the diameter AB of zone 3 circle to point R and U of the 
green zone. If it is known in advance that the fault resistance 
calculated cannot be attained along the route of the transmission 
line, then the risk of misoperation is nonexistence and the green 
area can be removed from zone 3 without affecting the security or 
reliability of the distance protection system. However, fault 
resistance along the route of the transmission line is not known 
in advance. Also, one should note that solid state and 
electromechanical relays can not be programmed, only 
microprocessor relays can. This really means that older relays 
will have to comply with NERC standards by disabling zone 3 
altogether. It is shown in (Horowitz et al., 2006) that disabling 
zone 3 in some cases will force protection engineers to provide 
back up protection solutions to remote circuit breakers. This 
might involve a considerable cost. Additionally, not all 
countries around the world have standards as strict as NERC, so 
the solid green area URI exist in the zone of protection without 
regard from the protection engineer. Lastly, even if the relay 
complies with NERC directives, an impedance can still fall 
anywhere in zone 3, not only the solid green area URI, under 
stressed system conditions as Phadke and Horowitz pointed out in 
their paper (Horowitz et al., 2006). This shows clearly the 
impedance protection is inherently insecure under stressed system 
conditions. 

Attention is now given to the assumptions stated in the 
beginning. It was assumed that all lines have the same impedance 
and all of them are contributing equal currents to the fault. It 
can be seen at once from Figure [fig:Distance-Relay-characteristic]
 that this assumption is not restricting the generality of the 
problem formulation. Because in any case the green area URI will 
exist due to the load profile under stressed conditions. 
Additionally, the fault contribution of the transmission lines 
will only affect the diameter BA of zone 3 which will only affect 
point U. Point U correspond to the max fault resistance. Stated 
differently, there will always be an overlap between the dynamic 
rating of the line and zone 3 and the short circuit levels from 
nearby lines will only affect the size of the overlap (area URI) 
not the overlap itself. Lastly, to derive equations [eq:VoltageAtRelat]
 and [eq:ApparentImpedanceAtRelay], a three phase fault has been 
assumed. This is due to the fact that line overload is three 
phase phenomenon. However, it should not be hard to be able to 
envision a single line to ground fault causing the same effect if 
one important line is operated with only one phase due to a line 
to line fault under heavy loading conditions. 

It should be apparent from the description above that the major 
issue that is faced by traditional impedance protection system is 
that the steady state impedance corresponding to a heavy load is 
coincident to the impedance under a fault on a remote line to 
which the distance protection system provides backup protection. 
It could be argued that impedance protection should be supervised 
by other steady state protection principles to enhance its 
selectivity, i.e, the ability to differentiate between a load and 
a fault current. However, other protection principles -such as 
over current protection- that can make the distinction between a 
load and a fault depend on the anticipated power flow for 
operation while the problem in hand is different. The confusion 
that is seen by the distance protection is because the power flow 
under system wide cascading failures changes considerably from 
the planned power flow. In other words, the load encroachment 
zone has to be set for system wide cascading scenarios that are 
not known in advance, which is close to impossible undertaking. 
One of the authors (Horowitz et al., 2006) states this fact as:

"The overwhelming thrust of the NERC rules and other instructions 
regarding the application of zone 3 elements has been to prevent 
its operation during emergency conditions. Although this is a 
desirable goal, it should be recognized that even with all the 
intelligence available to modern computer relays, the problem of 
distinguishing a fault from a heavy load in a relatively short 
time and using only the current and voltage signals available to 
the relay can not be solved in every single imaginable (and some 
unimaginable) power system scenarios".

3 Detection and mitigation of zone 3 misoperation in the planning 
  stage<sec:Detection-and-mitigation-of-cascading-events-in-the-planning-stage>

Most Independent System Operators (ISOs) (ERCOT, 2017; CAISO, 2015)
 today use N-1 criterion to judge whether the system is secure 
after the removal of one line in planning stage. However, given 
that zone 3 distance protection misoperation is not triggered 
until two or three lines go out of service (Liscouski et al., 2004)
, the distribution of power flow is hard to be taken into account 
in the planning stage as it would mean performing N-2 and N-3 
contingency analysis which is expensive computationally. Thus, it 
is increasingly hard to assess protection system capability under 
the most stressful system conditions. Due to that, the authors in 
(Li et al., 2007; Li et al., 2008) provided an efficient method 
to study the sensitivity of zone 3 under various operating 
conditions without the need for performing large number of power 
flow studies. In (Li et al., 2007; Li et al., 2008), the authors 
define a linearized impedance margin of a distance relay using 
system voltages, injected power and shunt susceptance. The 
impedance margin is defined as the distance between the measured 
impedance locus in the R-X plane to the boundary of the operating 
characteristic of the relay and is shown in Figure [fig:Impedance-margin-and]
. By doing so, the relays that may misoperate can be anticipated 
ahead of time in an efficient manner in the planning stage using 
simple formulas. However, it is shown in the paper that if the 
changes in the voltages or power injections are electrically far 
away from the relay under study, a situation that always exists 
in wide area cascading scenarios, the error in the analysis 
becomes unacceptable especially for long lines. [float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig3.tif>
[Figure 3: 
Impedance margin and impedance locus plot for a distance relay 
during a wide area cascading scenario<fig:Impedance-margin-and>
]


]

In (Aghamohammadi et al., 2016), the authors propose blocking 
zone 3 of certain distance relays ahead of time based on offline 
simulations. The authors propose that the system operator perform 
contingency analysis using credible historical contingencies in 
planning stage to observe the impedance trajectory at each 
distance relay in the system. The contingency scenarios to be 
performed have to include more than one contingency to create an 
impedance trajectory. The relays that misoperate during each 
contingency scenario due to the impedance trajectory entering 
zone 3 when no fault conditions exist should be short listed. Of 
those relays that are short listed, certain relays are selected 
such that their zone 3 protection will be disabled. The relays 
that will be disabled are common to all contingency scenarios and 
are selected based on a specific criterion explained in the 
paper. However, the contingency scenarios can be hard to design 
in the planning stage for modern power systems that have 
thousands of buses. Additionally, disabling zone 3 effectively 
disables backup protection for remote circuit breaker which is a 
situation that should be avoided unless another form of backup is 
available. 

The authors in (Song et al., 2007) proposed certain indices that 
can accurately gauge the severity of system conditions and the 
likelihood of cascades in real time. An index that is used to 
monitor distance relays is also proposed. If the indies 
associated with the distance relays exceed their threshold, then 
distance protection misoperation is about to occur and the system 
operator has the option to stop distance relays from operation. 
However, in practice only N-1 contingencies are studied and thus 
the severity index is chosen based on these cases. Nevertheless, 
if the system enters N-2 or N-3 contingency conditions, tuning of 
the “severity” threshold will be a difficult task 
computationally. 

Lastly, distance protection co-ordination has been explored in (Ravikumar et al., 2008; Ravikumar et al., 2009)
. An SVM for each relay is trained using the impedance trajectory 
that is seen by the relay during fault conditions. The impedance 
trajectory is obtained by using a transient stability program. 
SVM is then trained for various scenarios to distinguish zone 1, 
zone 2 and zone 3 faults. Training scenarios include cases for 
different fault types at different distances away from the relay 
that has the SVM and at different fault resistances. Testing 
scenarios for SVM include faults that have not used in training. 
By ensuring that the relays are well co-coordinated under various 
contingency conditions, unnecessary trip could be avoided. 
However, the impedance trajectory will depend on the system 
topology at the time of fault occurrence and this has not been 
taken into consideration in (Ravikumar et al., 2008; Ravikumar et al., 2009)
 which could lead to large offline training set. 

Due to the fact that distance protection co-ordination requires 
large amount of offline simulations by performing many 
contingency conditions, the authors in (Tasdighi et al., 2016) 
introduced the idea of “distance of impact” to automate the 
distance protection co-ordination. However, the authors use the 
super computer to perform their computations at the first stage. 
Once the distance of impact of each relay has been calculated, 
co-ordination of the distance relays becomes straight forward. A 
shortcoming of the distance co-ordination approach is that even 
though it can ensure that distance relays never overreach for 
faults beyond their reach, little research has been performed to 
study whether the co-ordination can ensure that relays will not 
misoperate under heavy loading conditions. 

As can be seen above, anticipation detection  of distance 
protection misoperation in the planning stage is a hard task. To 
be able to fully prevent distance protection misoperation, an 
N-x, where x is greater than 1, contingency analysis need to be 
done. Even though this could be done for small benchmark systems, 
contingency analysis, under uncertain load and generation, is 
computationally intensive for large system consisting of 
thousands of buses. Many ISOs may not have access to 
supercomputers to run such intensive computations. 

4 Communication Assisted Schemes<sec:Communication-Assisted-Schemes>

The 2003 blackouts pointed out the importance of having events 
along with the time they occurred. Investigators spent much of 
their time trying to match up the waveforms to reconstruct the 
sequence of events that led to the blackout. It was then apparent 
that to facilitate the transfer and comparison of waveforms, all 
samples need to have a time stamp for this purpose. Phasor 
Measurement Unit (PMU) or synchrophasor technology was then 
recommended to address this shortcoming (Liscouski et al., 2004). 
By the time of 2003 blackout, state estimation was a very mature 
field, but PMUs opened new areas for the application of state 
estimation by reducing the time needed to do state estimation due 
to wide spread deployment in the transmission network. A PMU 
measures the positive sequence voltage and current (both the 
magnitude and angle), which opens new areas for adaptive relaying 
and wide area control and protection. In typical distance 
protection schemes, the relay is only applied to a single 
transmission line. However, in a wide area protection scheme, a 
complete area (several transmission lines) can be protected using 
selected PMU devices without the need to apply PMUs to each 
single bus in the system. By transferring information in between 
PMUs in the power system, accurate decision regarding the nature 
of the impedance falling in zone 3 can be made and misoperation 
can be avoided.

With the introduction of PMUs, several fault detection and 
locations methods have been proposed. The salient feature of PMU 
detection schemes (Joe-Air et al., 2000) is that using the 
communication links to transfer data between the two ends of the 
lines, several conclusions can be drawn regarding whether the 
line is undergoing abnormal conditions. A salient feature of the 
PMU algorithm is the ability to monitor the status of the line 
and compute the parameters of the line online in a very accurate 
way. 

Due to the fact that zone 3 of distance relays may not be able 
differentiate between heavy line load and an actual fault on the 
system, the authors in (Lim et al., 2008) proposed that a tool be 
installed at the control center, also known as Independent System 
Operator (ISO), to continuously supervise the operation of zone 3 
elements. The tool will consist of two modules, a central control 
unit (CCU) and several regional control units (RCUs) as shown in 
Figure [fig:RCU-and-CCU]. The CCU will be installed in the ISO 
while the RCUs will be installed at select individual 
substations. The CCU measures the line outage distribution 
factors and generation shift factors for the entire power grid 
and sends all factors to the individual RCUs. RCUs use local 
measurements at the substation and communicate with one another. 
The individual RCUs will differentiate between faults and 
transfer of power flow and supervise distance relays based on the 
information received from the CCU and other RCUs. Even though 
this solution might be able to prevent all zone-3 misoperations, 
it needs considerable cost to construct the communication 
infrastructure that is needed to transmit the data between the 
individual substation and the ISO. [float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig4.tif>
[Figure 4: 
RCU and CCU of the solution in (Lim et al., 2008)<fig:RCU-and-CCU>
 
]


]

The authors in (Dutta et al., 2014) uses synchronized samples 
from both ends of the line to check whether the transmission line 
has been tripped successfully or not. The instantaneous power 
from both line ends are calculated. It is shown in the paper that 
after fault inception, the instantaneous power at both ends 
becomes positive. This hold true even under systems with week 
infeed. The method is applicable to all systems other than radial 
systems. However, due to the need to transfer data between both 
ends, significant cost may be incurred to establish such 
algorithm across each transmission line in the grid. The approach 
that has been proposed in (Dutta et al., 2014) has been validated 
using field data in (Esmaeilian et al., 2015). 

In (Navalkar et al., 2011), distributed PMUs are used to reach a 
definitive decision about the existence of the fault in the 
system using a synchrophasor state estimator (SynSE). The SynSE 
is used to detect network topology changes as well as determine 
the fault locations as shown in Figure [fig:Protection-logic-ofSYNSE]
. However, the grid has be completely observable by PMUs. Thus, 
siting PMUs has to be done carefully to not create unobservable 
islands under stressed system conditions and certain contingency 
conditions. [float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig5.tif>
[Figure 5: 
Protection logic of the paper in (Navalkar et al., 2011)<fig:Protection-logic-ofSYNSE>
 
]


]

In (Kundu et al., 2014) synchrophasors are proposed to supervise 
zone 3 operation. Specific indices are proposed to assert the 
fault using the currents which result in a very robust zone 3 
distance protection system. The algorithm forms a super node from 
the certain groups of PMUs. By summing the current going into the 
super node, a decision can be reached whether a disturbance 
exists or not. If a disturbance is detected, another logic is 
invoked to determine whether it is a fault for the group of PMUs 
with the higher deviation. The logic that is invoked after 
disturbance detection is impedance based. A weighted fault 
detection index is defined for this purpose. The weights used to 
define the index depend on the reach of the respective zone 3 
distance protection relay. If after disturbance detection, the 
weighted fault index is exceeded, a fault in zone 3 is declared 
and the relay is restrained from operation. However, to fully 
take advantage of the method, strategically located PMUs have to 
exist in the system which makes the approach highly dependent on 
the topology and any transmission system upgrades. Additionally, 
certain contingency conditions can cause some faults not to be 
detected due to the location of the PMUs. 

In (Garlapati et al., 2013), agents are used to aid zone 3 relay 
elements without enforcing a decision. In this scheme, each 
impedance relay will have the capability to communicate with 
other agents in the network that protect the same transmission 
line. If the majority of the agents informs the local distance 
relay that the impedance in its zone 3 reach is actually due to a 
fault, then the local distance relay should be energized and a 
trip command has to be issued. An optimization approach is set up 
such that the communication delay between the various agents are 
less than 1 second, which is the time of operation of zone 3. A 
similar approach has been proposed in (Haj-ahmed et al., 2014) 
where agents are installed everywhere without the optimization 
approach. 

In (Neyestanaki et al., 2015), a limited number of PMUs are used 
to determine the faulted line as well as the location of the 
fault. An optimization approach is used to locate a set of PMUs 
such that the observability is independent of the generator 
models. A backup protection zone is then constructed using the 
lines and buses between each PMU such that a line in not included 
in two regions. The sum of zero and positive sequence currents 
are used as discriminant for fault detection and location. If the 
sum is not zero then the area will be flagged as having a fault. 
Next comes the task of identifying the faulted line. For the area 
that is flagged as having a fault, a distance quantity will be 
calculated for each line within the area, i.e., each line will be 
assumed faulted and a distance quantity will be calculated. If 
the distance quantity falls between 0 to 1 then the faulted line 
will be determined. If more than one line is found to be faulted, 
an estimation of relative residual error is made and the line 
with the minimum residual error will be selected as the faulted 
line. It is clear from this description that two faults within 
any protected zone or cross country faults will be detected as 
one fault only. And even though one of the two faults may have 
not been cleared, the algorithm may not be able to detect such 
situation. 

In (Eissa et al., 2010), a backup wide area protection scheme is 
proposed. Short window DFT is used to extract the phasor 
information from the three phase voltages and currents. In this 
scheme, the absolute difference of the bus angles and currents 
are used to detect the fault. The minimum voltage magnitude 
establishes the closest bus to the fault and the maximum current 
angle difference between the buses establishes the faulted lines. 
However, for the method to work, the minimum voltage threshold 
has to be established. It is shown in the paper that a voltage 
threshold less than 0.95 means that there is a fault on a system. 
This immediately points out that in case of voltage instability 
conditions, the method can operate erroneously.

In (He et al., 2011), another wide area protection scheme is 
proposed. The solution consists of two components: a fault 
element identification (FEI) and a fault area detection (FAD). 
The FEI is used to identify the faulted element in the zone being 
protected. After that, the fault isolation is realized by 
coordination among area circuit breakers breakers. As part of the 
FEI, the measured voltage and current of one terminal of the 
protected area are used to estimate the voltages at the other 
end. If an internal fault occurs within the zone being monitored, 
then the estimated value will be different from the measured 
value at that bus causing a fault to be detected. On the other 
hand, the faulted area is detected through FAD. The substations 
that are within the faulted area need to send the information to 
the central control room. Afterwords, the central control room 
will search the suspected faulty lines and identify actual faulty 
lines quickly. The use of FAD concept reduces the communication 
overhead required by the scheme. The overall structure of the 
solution is shown in Figure [fig:The-concept-of-FAD]. [float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig6.tif>

[Figure 6: 
The concept that is given in (He et al., 2011). A select number 
of substations will be included in the communication network. <fig:The-concept-of-FAD>
]
]

The authors in (Lin et al., 2016) use PMUs, that are in place as 
part of a wide area protection scheme, to detect the power flow 
transfer due to the removal of faulted line from service. In (Lin et al., 2016)
, the load flow transfer to a line can be calculated using the 
network topology via the distribution factors. If the measured 
power flow transfer significantly mismatches the calculated power 
flow transfer, then a fault will be declared. Based on that 
detection, zone 3 is adaptively adjusted to prevent misoperation 
which eliminate distance protection zone 3 misoperation. 

Even though PMU based schemes and wide-area based schemes can 
offer attractive solutions to eliminate the problem of distance 
protection misoperation, these solutions require significant 
communication infrastructure cost. Additionally, the power grid 
is a critical infrastructure and the cybersecurity risk may be 
eminent if the grid is brought online for communications 
purposes. 

5 Modifications to Local Distance Protection<sec:Modifications-to-Local>

In addition to using PMUs for fault detection and assisting zone 
3 tripping, various authors proposed making changes to the way 
impedance relays operate. In these methods, the authors proposed 
additional criteria to assist distance protection in order to 
assert that fault exists within the relay reach using local data. 

Local measurements are used in (Nayak et al., 2015) to assist 
zone-3 tripping. The authors proposed to distinguish three phase 
faults from system overloads. The DC decaying component and the 
line load angle are used to determine whether a fault has 
occurred within the reach of local distance relay. The DC 
decaying fault component is reconstructed from the measured 
currents in all three phases. Since the fault is three phase, a 
DC decaying component must exist in one of the phases. A 
transient monitoring function will then be defined to be the 
maximum of all three phases DC decaying components in one cycle. 
Also, for the three phase to be asserted, the line load angle has 
to be greater than 50 degrees. Both the monitoring function as 
well as the line load angle has to be true for a three phase 
fault to be declared. The drawback of this method is that the 
fault must have significant decaying DC component which makes it 
challenging for certain fault incipient angles and transmission 
line lengths as a significant decaying DC component can only 
occur when the fault occurs at certain incipient angles and under 
certain X/R ratios. Additionally, the paper assumes the angle 
between the current and the voltage at the relay to be more than 
50 degrees as a fault indicator. However, it has been pointed out 
in (Horowitz et al., 2006) that under stressed system conditions 
the angle may indeed exceed that threshold with no fault on the 
system. Also, if the swing frequency in the system is anticipated 
to be larger than 5 Hz, threshold selection for transient 
monitoring becomes a hard task which could mislead the scheme to 
confuse power system swing for three phase faults. Lastly, the 
effect of fault resistance has not been studied in the paper. 
Fault resistance can potentially cause trouble setting the 
threshold for the transient monitoring function as it affects the 
DC decaying component.

In (Jonsson et al., 2003) the rate of change of voltage is used 
as a trip restraint to supervise distance protection 
misoperation. The idea is that fault occurrence or fault clearing 
causes the voltage seen by the relay to change drastically. The 
authors propose if the local relay senses that the system voltage 
is stressed according to the conditions listed in (Vu et al., 1999)
, the rate of voltage change (\Delta V/\Delta t) will be used to 
assert whether a fault has occurred and cleared within zone 3 
protection using two thresholds for both fault occurrence and 
fault clearing. Additionally, the authors proposed to use a 
thermal loading monitoring function to decide whether the maximum 
conductor temperature has been reached. The temperature 
monitoring function will start operation after the fault has been 
detected. If the temperature monitoring function declares that 
the line temperature has reached maximum limit, the line will be 
tripped whether the fault has been cleared or not. However, for 
the trip command to be secure, large amount of offline 
simulations need to be carried out to know the worst case rate of 
change of voltage. The major disadvantage of the method is that 
under voltage instability, the (\Delta V/\Delta t) criterion is 
not exclusive property for faults as pointed in (Sharifzadeh et al., 2014)
 since under voltage instability, a sudden generator tripping 
could cause the same (\Delta V/\Delta t). 

Since it is hard to distinguish between evolving pre-blackout 
event and short circuit conditions using magnitude of voltage, 
another trip restraint quantity, namely (\Delta I/\Delta V) has 
been used along with (\Delta V/\Delta t) criterion to trip zone 3 
securely in (Sharifzadeh et al., 2014). The (\Delta I/\Delta V) 
threshold value has also been obtained using offline simulations. 
The disadvantage of the method in (Sharifzadeh et al., 2014) is 
that neither contingency analysis nor system loading levels have 
been taken into consideration.

The use of fault generated high frequency components has also 
been investigated in literature (Probert et al., 2002). Such 
usage can give a more precise answer whether a fault has occurred 
thus making tripping in zone 3 more secure. In (Perera et al., 2011)
, the energy of the first three current levels and the third 
approximation is used to train a probabilistic classifier. The 
energy is calculated using certain levels of the discrete wavelet 
transform of the three phase currents. Using this energy 
features, a decision is made whether a transient signal if due to 
a fault or non-fault condition on a line. A simpler online 
transient classifier has been proposed in (Abdullah, 2016), where 
the transient events occurring on the transmission lines nearby 
any distance relay are identified. Modal transformation is used 
to transform the phase currents into modal currents. The discrete 
wavelet transform coefficients of the aerial modes (Hedman, 1965) 
are combined in a certain manner to train a feedforward neural 
network to classify those transients. However, the major 
drawbacks of both (Perera et al., 2011) and (Abdullah, 2016) is 
that they cannot be used to tell whether the fault is within the 
relay protection reach even though they can tell whether a fault 
has occurred in the network. These papers can only be useful if a 
method is found to use the transient classification as an 
entrance point to determining whether the fault is within the 
protection reach of the relay but this has not been done in 
literature to the best of our knowledge.

Various adaptive zone 3 settings were also investigated in 
literature where zone 3 reach is adjusted based on local 
information. In (Zadeh et al., 2008; Zadeh et al., 2011), ANN has 
been used to predict the correct load blinder under various 
system conditions. The load blinder is then combined with the 
zone 3 settings to block any undesirable tripping. The load 
blinder is only activated under balanced conditions to make sure 
that the heavy loading is not confused for unbalanced fault 
conditions. The load blinder is determined based on offline 
simulations. The simulations take into account the loading level 
of the power system, fault incipient angle, source impedance 
ratio, fault resistance and fault location. The features used to 
train ANN is the active and reactive power, voltage as well as 
the rate of change of both the voltages and currents seen at the 
relay terminal as shown in Figure [fig:Creation-of-adaptive]. A 
simple line connected to another line with a load in between is 
used to test the method which is a disadvantage of the method. 
Also, the effect of the system topology wasn't studied. It is 
also foreseen that the inclusion for contingency analysis in ANN 
training will require large offline simulations and will make 
load blinder selection difficult task. Additionally, only three 
phase fault currents has been used to train the ANN and in case a 
single line to ground fault occurs and cause the features to be 
different than the ones used in training, the method is expected 
to fail because ANN is known to have bad generalization 
capabilities (Zurada, 1992). [float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig7.tif>
[Figure 7: 
Creation of adaptive load blinder in (Zadeh et al., 2011) <fig:Creation-of-adaptive>
]


]

In (Nikolaidis, 2016; Nikolaidis et al., 2014), the authors 
propose changing zone 3 reach during emergency conditions to 
prevent distance protection misoperation if certain system 
conditions are met. If those system conditions are met, zone 3 
protection reach will be shrunk to zone 2 which in turn gives 
maximum security. During stressed system conditions, the 
impedance seen by the local relay approaches the original zone 3 
border, whether this border is MHO characteristics or polygonal 
one. The authors propose to define a fourth protection zone, 
called third zone proximity area (TZPA), as well as a fifth 
protection zone, called third zone modification area (TZMA), to 
change zone 3 protection reach based on certain criteria. The 
TZMA is a region within TZPA but closer to zone 3 protection 
zone. The authors provided rules on how to set both TZMA and 
TZPA. Once the impedance enters this TZPA and crosses zone 3 fast 
enough, the fault will be declared. However, if the impedance 
enters TZPA and stays within TZPA, the TZMA logic will be put 
into action. Zone 3 protection will be shrunk to zone 2 if the 
impedance crosses TZMA within a minute. This one minute is used 
to adjust for restorative corrective forces of the gird such as 
generator excitation controls and transformer load tap changer. 
In summary, zone 3 protection will only be changed if the 
impedance crosses TZMA with a certain rate within a specified 
time delay once it starts changing in TZPA. These ideas are 
illustrated in Figure [fig:TZMA-and-TZPA]. Although, the approach 
is very promising, a fast evolving system instability could 
mislead the scheme. Additionally, it can be seen that the 
approach proposed sacrifices dependability for security as 
evident by shrinking zone 3; if a fault occurs within the 
original zone 3 protection zone beyond the original zone 2 reach 
after zone 3 protection zone is shrunk, the approach proposed by 
the authors will rely heavily on the closest relay and circuit 
breaker to clear the fault. However, if this relay or circuit 
breaker fails to clear the fault, the fault will go uncleared 
worsening the already stressed system conditions. Lastly, the 
proposed algorithm will fail definitely in case the impedance 
stays within TZPA, suddenly jumps to original zone 3 due to zone 
3 fault before the time delay expires then stays in zone 3 after 
fault clearing due to line heavy loading conditions. [float Figure:
<Graphics file: C:/Users/habdullah/Dropbox/Papers/LitSurvey/tex_source/fig8.tif>
[Figure 8: 
TZMA and TZPA of the method in (Nikolaidis, 2016)<fig:TZMA-and-TZPA>
 
]


]

Lastly, the authors in (Ma et al., 2016) proposed to identify 
power flow overload based on a newly proposed concept. This 
concept is based on the phasor relationships in the complex 
phasor plane. The paper only differentiates between three phase 
faults and overloads as overloads are three phase balanced 
phenomenon. Since the paper only aims to distinguish three phase 
faults from overload, any three phase fault on a transmission 
line can be analyzed without the need of information from the 
other end of line. This is due to the fact that the arc voltage 
is not affected by the infeed fault current making the fault 
point grounded through the arc resistance. This property is used 
to derive the criterion to differentiate between three phase 
faults and overloads based on an impedance criterion that can be 
adaptively adjusted using the measured phase angle between the 
voltage and current at the relay location as well as a constant 
safety factor. However, the method is not applicable when a three 
phase fault occurs within the distance relay reach during an 
overload condition. Additionally, it is assumed that all three 
phase to ground faults involve arc without the consideration of 
the other situations when three phase downed conductors cause 
such faults which in turn could cause some of the assumptions 
used in deriving the impedance criterion to be invalid. 

In summary, the use of rate of change of voltages and currents 
can prevent the problem of distance protection misoperation in 
most occasions but does not fully prevent it. Other methods use 
previous operational experience with distance relays to propose 
solutions to the problem of distance protection misoperation. 
However, system conditions and scenarios that were not previously 
encountered could mislead those proposed solutions. The use of 
high frequency fault generated transients seems to be a promising 
area but it is scarcely researched in literature.

6 Conclusion

The problem of distance protection misoperation has been 
presented. Various approaches to solve the problem have been 
surveyed and organized into three main categories. The methods in 
each category have been explained. Additionally, the advantages 
and disadvantages of each method have been pointed out. 

The first category is anticipation of distance protection 
misoperation in the planning stage. In this category, distance 
protection misoperation could be anticipated day ahead based on 
the forecasted load and generation as well as contingency 
conditions. However, due to the large size of modern day power 
systems, such anticipation is computationally intensive. 

The second category is communication assisted protection schemes. 
The main idea in this category is that using information from 
both ends of the line or information from various substations in 
the network, a blocking command can be issued to the affected 
distance relay. Nevertheless, these communication assisted 
protection schemes have not found wide industry acceptance due to 
cybersecurity risks as well as the economic cost that is required 
to build such systems. 

The third category is modification of the local distance 
protection function using local information. The main idea in 
this family of solutions is that using operational system 
experience as well as the local data, one can tell with certainty 
that a distance relay is about to misoperate. By detecting such 
conditions, a blocking command can be issued to guard the relay 
against misoperation. Nevertheless, the methods in this last 
category may fail under system conditions that were not taken 
into consideration while developing these methods. 

The most appropriate method to mitigate zone 3 misoperation is 
dependent on what is the most important factor for the utility 
company. For example, one utility company may prefer a 
communication-assisted scheme using remote measurements to 
eliminate the possibility for distance protection misoperation 
while accepting the cybersecurity vulnerabilities that are 
introduced. Another utility may not be willing to accept the 
cybersecurity risks or the cost of constructing such scheme and 
requires a solution using local measurements or minimum remote 
measurements. The authors think that methods which use local 
relay data are worthy of research attention as cybersecurity 
threats are becoming a major concern. 

References

[Abdullah 2016] Abdullah, Ahmad, "Towards a new paradigm for ultrafast transmission line relaying" (2016), 1--8.

[Abdullah et al. 2012] Abdullah, Ahmad and Esmaeilian, Ahad and Gurrala, Gurunath and Dutta, Papiya and Popovic, Tomo and Kezunovic, Mladen, "Test Bed for Cascading Failure Scenarios Evaluation" (2012), 18--20.

[Aghamohammadi et al. 2016] Aghamohammadi, Mohammad Reza and Hashemi, Sina and Hasanzadeh, A, "A new approach for mitigating blackout risk by blocking minimum critical distance relays", International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems (2016), 162--172.

[Baldick et al. 2008] Baldick, Ross and Chowdhury, Badrul and Dobson, Ian and Dong, Zhaoyang and Gou, Bei and Hawkins, David and Huang, Henry and Jou…, "Initial review of methods for cascading failure analysis in electric power transmission systems IEEE PES CAMS task force on u…", IEEE (2008), 1--8.

[CAISO 2015] CAISO, "California ISO Planning Standards" (2015).

[Chen et al. 2005] Chen, Jie and Thorp, James S and Dobson, Ian, "Cascading dynamics and mitigation assessment in power system disturbances via a hidden failure model", International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems (2005), 318--326.

[Dutta et al. 2014] Dutta, Papiya and Esmaeilian, Ahad and Kezunovic, Mladen, "Transmission-line fault analysis using synchronized sampling", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2014), 942--950.

[ERCOT 2017] ERCOT, "ERCOT Nodal Protocols-Section 5: Transmission Security Analysis and Reliability Unit Commitment" (2017).

[Eissa et al. 2010] Eissa, MM and Masoud, M Elshahat and Elanwar, MMMA, "A novel back up wide area protection technique for power transmission grids using phasor measurement unit", Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on (2010), 270--278.

[Entoso-E 2015] Entoso-E, "Final Report on Blackout in Turkey on 31st March 2015", Entoso-E (2015).

[Esmaeilian et al. 2015] Esmaeilian, Ahad and Popovic, Tomo and Kezunovic, Mladen, "Transmission line relay mis-operation detection based on time-synchronized field data", Electric Power Systems Research (2015), 174--183.

[Garlapati et al. 2013] Garlapati, Shravan and Lin, Hua and Heier, Andrew and Shukla, Sandeep K and Thorp, James, "A hierarchically distributed non-intrusive agent aided distance relaying protection scheme to supervise Zone 3", International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems (2013), 42--49.

[Haj-ahmed et al. 2014] Haj-ahmed, Mohammed A and Illindala, Mahesh S, "Intelligent coordinated adaptive distance relaying", Electric Power Systems Research (2014), 163--171.

[He et al. 2011] He, Z. and Zhang, Z. and Chen, W. and Malik, O. P. and Yin, X., "Wide-Area Backup Protection Algorithm Based on Fault Component Voltage Distribution", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2011), 2752--2760.

[Hedman 1965] Hedman, DE, "Propagation on overhead transmission lines I-theory of modal analysis", IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems (1965), 200--205.

[Hines et al. 2009] Hines, Paul and Apt, Jay and Talukdar, Sarosh, "Large blackouts in North America: Historical trends and policy implications", Energy Policy (2009), 5249--5259.

[Horowitz et al. 2006] Horowitz, SH and Phadke, AG, "Third zone revisited", Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on (2006), 23--29.

[Joe-Air et al. 2000] Joe-Air, Jiang and Jun-Zhe, Yang and Ying-Hong, Lin and Chih-Wen, Liu and Jih-Chen, Ma, "An adaptive PMU based fault detection/location technique for transmission lines. I. Theory and algorithms", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2000), 486--493.

[Jonsson et al. 2003] Jonsson, Mattias and Daalder, Jaap E, "An adaptive scheme to prevent undesirable distance protection operation during voltage instability", Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on (2003), 1174--1180.

[Kosterev et al. 1999] Kosterev, Dmitry N and Taylor, Carson W and Mittelstadt, William A, "Model validation for the August 10, 1996~WSCC system outage", Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on (1999), 967--979.

[Kundu et al. 2014] Kundu, Pratim and Pradhan, Ashok Kumar, "Synchrophasor-assisted zone 3 operation", Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on (2014), 660--667.

[Li et al. 2007] Li, SH and Yorino, N and Zoka, Y, "Operation margin analysis of zone 3 impedance relay based on sensitivities to power injection", IET generation, transmission & distribution (2007), 312--317.

[Li et al. 2008] Li, Shenghu and Yorino, Naoto and Ding, Ming and Zoka, Yoshifumi, "Sensitivity analysis to operation margin of zone 3 impedance relays with bus power and shunt susceptance", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2008), 102--108.

[Lim et al. 2008] Lim, Seong-II and Liu, Chen-Ching and Lee, Seung-Jae and Choi, Myeon-Song and Rim, Seong-Jeong, "Blocking of zone 3 relays to prevent cascaded events", Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on (2008), 747--754.

[Lin et al. 2016] Lin, Xiangning and Yu, Kun and Tong, Ning and Li, Zhengtian and Khalid, Muhammad Shoaib and Huang, Jingguang and Li, Zhongqing …, "Countermeasures on preventing backup protection mal-operation during load flow transferring", International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems (2016), 27--33.

[Liscouski et al. 2004] Liscouski, B and Elliot, W, "Final report on the august 14, 2003~blackout in the united states and canada: Causes and recommendations", A report to US Department of Energy (2004).

[Ma et al. 2016] Ma, Jing and Liu, Chang and Zhao, Yang and Kang, Shengyang and Thorp, James S, "An Adaptive Overload Identification Method Based on Complex Phasor Plane", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2016), 2250--2259.

[NERC 2014] NERC, "Standard PRC-004-3 - Protection System Misoperation Identification and Correction (PRC-004-3)" (2014).

[Navalkar et al. 2011] Navalkar, Prashant V and Soman, Shreevardhan A, "Secure remote backup protection of transmission lines using synchrophasors", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2011), 87--96.

[Nayak et al. 2015] Nayak, Paresh Kumar and Pradhan, Ashok Kumar and Bajpai, Prabodh, "Secured zone 3 protection during stressed condition", Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on (2015), 89--96.

[Neyestanaki et al. 2015] Neyestanaki, M. K. and Ranjbar, A. M., "An Adaptive PMU-Based Wide Area Backup Protection Scheme for Power Transmission Lines", IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid (2015), 1550--1559.

[Nikolaidis 2016] Nikolaidis, V., "Emergency Zone 3 Modification as a Local Response-Driven Protection Measure against System Collapse", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2016), 1--1.

[Nikolaidis et al. 2014] Nikolaidis, VC and Savvopoulos, N and Safigianni, AS and Vournas, CD, "Adjusting third zone distance protection to avoid voltage collapse", IEEE (2014), 1--7.

[Novosel et al. 2004] Novosel, Damir and Begovic, Miroslav M and Madani, Vahid, "Shedding light on blackouts", Power and Energy Magazine, IEEE (2004), 32--43.

[Perera et al. 2011] Perera, N. and Rajapakse, A., "Recognition of Fault Transients Using a Probabilistic Neural-Network Classifier", 2011 Ieee Power and Energy Society General Meeting (2011).

[Probert et al. 2002] Probert, S. A. and Song, Y. H., "Detection and classification of high frequency transients using wavelet analysis" (2002), 801-806 vol.2.

[Protection et al. 2005a] System Protection and Control Task Force of the NERC Planning Committee, "Increase Line Loadability by Enabling Load Encroachment Functions of Digital Relays" (2005).

[Protection et al. 2005b] System Protection and Control Task Force of the NERC Planning Committee, "NERC Standard PRC-023-2" (2005).

[Ravikumar et al. 2008] Ravikumar, B and Thukaram, D and Khincha, HP, "An approach for distance relay co-ordination using support vector machines" (2008), 1--6.

[Ravikumar et al. 2009] Ravikumar, B and Thukaram, D and Khincha, HP, "An approach using support vector machines for distance relay coordination in transmission system", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2009), 79--88.

[Sharifzadeh et al. 2014] Sharifzadeh, Mostafa and Lesani, H and Sanaye-Pasand, Majid, "A new algorithm to stabilize distance relay operation during voltage-degraded conditions", Power Delivery, IEEE Transactions on (2014), 1639--1647.

[Song et al. 2007] Song, Hongbiao and Kezunovic, Mladen, "A new analysis method for early detection and prevention of cascading events", Electric Power Systems Research (2007), 1132--1142.

[Tasdighi et al. 2016] Tasdighi, M and Kezunovic, M, "Automated review of distance relay settings adequacy after the network topology changes", IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery (2016), 1873--1881.

[Thompson et al. 2015] Thompson, Michael J and Heidfeld, Daniel L, "Transmission line setting calculations-beyond the cookbook" (2015), 850--865.

[Vu et al. 1999] Vu, Khoi and Begovic, Miroslav M and Novosel, Damir and Saha, Murari Mohan, "Use of local measurements to estimate voltage-stability margin", IEEE Transactions on Power Systems (1999), 1029--1035.

[Yamashita et al. 2009] Yamashita, Koji and Li, Juan and Zhang, Pei and Liu, Chen-Ching, "Analysis and control of major blackout events", IEEE (2009), 1--4.

[Zadeh et al. 2008] Zadeh, H Khorashadi and Li, Z, "Artificial neural network based load blinder for distance protection" (2008), 1--6.

[Zadeh et al. 2011] Zadeh, Hassan Khorashadi and Li, Zuyi, "Adaptive load blinder for distance protection", International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems (2011), 861--867.

[Zurada 1992] Zurada, Jacek M, "Introduction to artificial neural systems", West St. Paul (1992).



